Changes in substrate availability drive carbon cycle response to chronic warming. As earth s climate continues to warm, it is important to understand how the capacity of terrestrial ecosystems to retain carbon (C) will be affected. We combined measurements of microbial activity with the concentration, quality, and physical accessibility of soil carbon to microorganisms to evaluate the mechanisms by which more than two decades of experimental warming has altered the carbon cycle in a Northeast US temperate deciduous forest. We found that concentrations of soil organic matter were reduced in both the organic and mineral soil horizons. The molecular composition of the carbon was altered in the mineral soil with significant reductions in the relative abundance of polysaccharides and lignin, and an increase in lipids. Mineral-associated organic matter was preferentially depleted by warming in the top 3 cm of mineral soil. We found that potential extracellular enzyme activity per gram of soil at a common temperature was generally unaffected by warming treatment. However, by measuring potential extracellular enzyme activities between 4 and 30 C, we found that activity per unit microbial biomass at in-situ temperatures was increased by warming. This was associated with a tendency for microbial biomass to decrease with warming. These results indicate that chronic warming has reduced soil organic matter concentrations, selecting for a smaller but more active microbial community increasingly dependent on mineral-associated organic matter. Soil carbon; Climate feedbacks; Enzyme activity; Microbial adaptationLong-Term Warming Alters Carbohydrate Degradation Potential in Temperate Forest Soils. As Earth s climate warms, soil carbon pools and the microbial communities that process them may change, altering the way in which carbon is recycled in soil. In this study, we used a combination of metagenomics and bacterial cultivation to evaluate the hypothesis that experimentally raising soil temperatures by 5 C for 5, 8, or 20 years increased the potential for temperate forest soil microbial communities to degrade carbohydrates. Warming decreased the proportion of carbohydrate degrading genes in the organic horizon derived from eukaryotes and increased the fraction of genes in the mineral soil associated with Actinobacteria in all studies. Genes associated with carbohydrate degradation increased in the organic horizon after five years of warming, but had decreased in the organic horizon after warming the soil continuously for 20 years. However, a greater proportion of the 295 bacteria from 6 phyla (10 classes, 14 orders, 34 families) isolated from heated plots in the 20-year experiment were able to depolymerize cellulose and xylan compared to bacterial isolates from control soils. Together, these findings indicate that enrichment of bacteria capable of degrading carbohydrates could be important for accelerated carbon cycling in a warmer world. The massive carbon stocks currently held in soils have been built up over millennia, and, while numerous lines of evidence indicate climate change will accelerate the processing of this carbon, it is unclear whether the genetic repertoire of the microbes responsible for this elevated activity will also change. In this study, we showed that bacterial isolated from plots subject to 20 years of 5 C warming were more likely to depolymerize the plant polymers xylan and cellulose, but that carbohydrate degradation capacity is not uniformly enriched by warming treatment in metagenomes of soil microbial communities. This study illustrates the utility of combining culture-dependent and culture-independent surveys of microbial communities to improve our understanding of the role changing microbial communities may play in soil carbon cycling under climate change.Genome sequence and description of the anaerobic lignin-degrading bacterium Tolumonas lignolytica sp. nov.. Tolumonas lignolytica BRL6-1T sp. nov. is the type strain of T. lignolytica sp. nov., a proposed novel species of the Tolumonas genus. This strain was isolated from tropical rainforest soils based on its ability to utilize lignin as a sole carbon source. Cells of Tolumonas lignolytica BRL6-1T are mesophilic, non-spore forming, Gram-negative rods that are oxidase and catalase negative. The genome for this isolate was sequenced and returned in seven unique contigs totaling 3.6Mbp, enabling the characterization of several putative pathways for lignin breakdown. Particularly, we found an extracellular peroxidase involved in lignin depolymerization, as well as several enzymes involved in beta-aryl ether bond cleavage, which is the most abundant linkage between lignin monomers. We also found genes for enzymes involved in ferulic acid metabolism, which is a common product of lignin breakdown. By characterizing pathways and enzymes employed in the bacterial breakdown of lignin in anaerobic environments, this work should assist in the efficient engineering of biofuel production from lignocellulosic material. Anaerobic lignin degradation, Tropical forest soil isolate, Tolumonas Two decades of warming increases diversity of a potentially lignolytic bacterial community. As Earth s climate warms, the massive stores of carbon found in soil are predicted to become depleted, and leave behind a smaller carbon pool that is less accessible to microbes. At a long-term forest soil-warming experiment in central Massachusetts, soil respiration and bacterial diversity have increased, while fungal biomass and microbially-accessible soil carbon have decreased. Here, we evaluate how warming has affected the microbial community’s capability to degrade chemically-complex soil carbon using lignin-amended BioSep beads. We profiled the bacterial and fungal communities using PCR-based methods and completed extracellular enzyme assays as a proxy for potential community function. We found that lignin-amended beads selected for a distinct community containing bacterial taxa closely related to known lignin degraders, as well as members of many genera not previously noted as capable of degrading lignin. Warming tended to drive bacterial community structure more strongly in the lignin beads, while the effect on the fungal community was limited to unamended beads. Of those bacterial operational taxonomic units (OTUs) enriched by the warming treatment, many were enriched uniquely on lignin-amended beads. These taxa may be contributing to enhanced soil respiration under warming despite reduced readily available C availability. In aggregate, these results suggest that there is genetic potential for chemically complex soil carbon degradation that may lead to extended elevated soil respiration with long-term warming. chemically complex carbon, climate change, microbial ecology, soil organic matter, Bio-Sep beads, lignin degradation, in-situ enrichment Long-term forest soil warming alters microbial communities in temperate forest soils. Soil microbes are major drivers of soil carbon cycling, yet we lack an understanding of how climate warming will affect microbial communities. Three ongoing field studies at the Harvard Forest Long-term Ecological Research (LTER) site (Petersham, MA) have warmed soils 5 C above ambient temperatures for 5, 8, and 20 years. We used this chronosequence to test the hypothesis that soil microbial communities have changed in response to chronic warming. Bacterial community composition was studied using Illumina sequencing of the 16S ribosomal RNA gene, and bacterial and fungal abundance were assessed using quantitative PCR. Only the 20-year warmed site exhibited significant change in bacterial community structure in the organic soil horizon, with no significant changes in the mineral soil. The dominant taxa, abundant at 0.1% or greater, represented 0.3% of the richness but nearly 50% of the observations (sequences). Individual members of the Actinobacteria, Alphaproteobacteria and Acidobacteria showed strong warming responses, with one Actinomycete decreasing from 4.5 to 1% relative abundance with warming. Ribosomal RNA copy number can obfuscate community profiles, but is also correlated with maximum growth rate or trophic strategy among bacteria. Ribosomal RNA copy number correction did not affect community profiles, but rRNA copy number was significantly decreased in warming plots compared to controls. Increased bacterial evenness, shifting beta diversity, decreased fungal abundance and increased abundance of bacteria with low rRNA operon copy number, including Alphaproteobacteria and Acidobacteria, together suggest that more or alternative niche space is being created over the course of long-term warming. climate change, microbial ecology, ribosomal RNA, rrn operon copy number, trophic strategy Changes in microbial dynamics during long-term decomposition in tropical forests. Humid tropical forest soils are characterized by low and fluctuating redox, conditions which are thought to inhibit organic matter degradation by microbes. However, evidence suggests that soil microbial communities are adapted to the redox conditions in these ecosystems. In this study we tested the hypothesis that soil oxygen (O2) availability as an index of redox conditions structures patterns in litter decomposition and associated microbial community dynamics over space and time in humid tropical forests. We conducted a two year decomposition experiment on a common litter substrate in four sites along an elevational gradient with well described climate and redox dynamics. Microbial community sequencing, potential enzyme activities, and litter chemistry measurements were made on litter and soil to determine the relationship between soil and litter communities and biogeochemistry. Decomposition was slowest in the upper elevation site, which was the wettest and had the lowest average soil O2 availability. However, soil hydrolytic and litter phenol oxidase activities were greatest at this site. Small subunit ribosomal RNA genes were sequenced with universal primers for bacteria, archaea and eukaryotes, yielding 40,850 unique taxa after quality filtering and clustering. Across all sites, microbial succession was observed as increasing litter richness, converging bacterial community profiles, and diverging fungal community profiles. Initial decomposers (1e4 weeks) included many r-selected bacteria, including Alpha-, Beta- and Gammaproteobacteria, Clostridia, Bacteroidetes. We also found evidence of anaerobic fungi such as Cryptococcus, as well as the plant-associated Phialocephala and Phyllachora species, suggesting that anaerobic and plant-associated fungi are prevalent later in decomposition in soils with low and fluctuating redox conditions. Because of the striking similarities between sites in functional potential despite differences in wet tropical soil decomposing communities and litter chemistry, we suggest that future climate-driven disruptions to redox fluctuations could significantly alter the terrestrial carbon (C) cycle in tropical forests. Anaerobic decomposition ?Fluctuating redox potential ?Small subunit ribosomal rRNA gene community analysis? Hydrolytic and oxidative enzyme activity Population dynamics? Microbial succession Ecological insights in the dynamics of plant biomass-degrading microbial consortia. A key impediment to optimized plant biomass degradation is our current lack of understanding of the ecological process and mechanisms that exist in lignocellulolose-deconstructing microbial communities. Here we examine the successional dynamics, spatio-temporal nutritional fluxes and interactions between the constituents of plant biomass-degrading microbial consortia. This effort yielded a conceptual framework that describes and promotes discussion on the main topics underpinning the ecological basis of such systems. We propose that the deconstruction of plant biomass and the systematic release of sugars in these consortia are directly controlled by the activity of the key microbes. These activities are linked to their numbers and metabolic traits and then to the level of interaction (synergism or competition) among pairs or groups. This essay considers also the themes of niche occupancy, minimal effective consortium, ecological ‘cheaters’ and the Black Queen Hypothesis as key concepts and fundaments that can foster our appraisal on this subject. Lignocellulose, microbial consortia, successional dynamics, sugars, synergismChemical communication connects soil food webs. Food webs are conceptual maps of ecosystem matter and energy flows, intended to illustrate the connections between organisms at different trophic and phylogenetic levels. All organisms communicate, most by way of diffusion of chemical signals, often in a density-dependent manner. In this essay, I suggest that food web interactions are regulated by extracellular, inter-species and often inter-domain communication. Defining the web of chemical communication in soils may illuminate new food web interactions and improve our understanding for how disturbances will reverberate through trophic interactions in terrestrial ecosystems. Food web interactions Quorum sensing Signal orphans Cheating AHL priming SoilUp against the wall: the effects of climate warming on soil microbial diversity and the potential for feedbacks to the carbon cycle. Earth’s climate is warming, and there is evidence that increased temperature alters soil C cycling, which may result in a self-reinforcing (positive), microbial mediated feedback to the climate system. Though soil microbes are major drivers of soil C cycling, we lack an understanding of how temperature affects SOM decomposition. Numerous studies have explored, to differing degrees, the extent to which climate change may affect biodiversity. While there is ample evidence that community diversity begets ecosystem stability and resilience, we know of keystone species that perform functions whose effects far outweigh their relative abundance. In this paper, we first review the meaning of microbial diversity and how it relates to ecosystem function, then conduct a literature review of field-based climate warming studies that have made some measure of microbial diversity. Finally, we explore how measures of diversity may yield a larger, more complete picture of climate warming effects on microbial communities, and how this may translate to altered carbon cycling and greenhouse gas emissions. While warming effects seem to be ecosystem-specific, the lack of observable consistency between measures is due in some part to the diversity in measures of microbial diversity. climate warming; keystone species; long-term field study; metagenomics; microbial community diversity; niche theory; richness; soil; stress responseRhizosphere microbial communication as mediation for plant nutrient acquisition. 